you know we we we have a lot of
information now to show that cancer is
predominantly a mitochondrial metabolic
disease. Um
we have looked at the number structure
and function in mitochondria all major
cancers and you find abnormalities in in
these christ the number of mitochondria
the function of the mitochondria
um so it seems to be a common
pathophysiological problem in all
cancers. They they transition from
oxidative energy through oxidative
phosphorilation to energy through what
we have now defined as substrate what is
substrate level phosphorilation and a
very old ancient way of getting energy
actually before oxygen came into the
atmosphere 2 and a half billion years
ago. All the cells were fermenttors at
that time. It was the it was the
development the archoacteria and the
development of the of the original
fusion between a primitive ukareotic
cell and and a and a type of bacteria
that was the m became the mitochondria
which then led to metazzoans and all of
the development that we we know about.
But every one of the cancers that we
look at, uh, regardless of where it is,
every one that we have, all the the
major ones are all blowing out large
amounts of lactic acid and suinic acid.
Um, Warberg had it known originally that
cancer was a disorder of energy
metabolism. He made he made a couple of
um well first of all he didn't know
about the the the fermentation of amino
acid inside the matrix of the
mitochondria in the TCA cycle itself you
can ferment he didn't know that um and
second of all he made the mistake of
assuming that oxygen consumption was an
accurate biioarker for ATP synthesis
through oxidative phosphorilation. Derek
here and others we clearly showed that
the consumption of oxygen in in cancer
cells is not directly linked to at
significant ATP production. So uh and
then we found with our work with
Shannonopoulos Christos from Seml Weiss
University in Budapest
um he had long been suggesting that
there is a firm that there is a a
substrate level phosphorilation
mechanism and the suinyl coalase
reaction in the in the matrix of the the
mitochondria.
And uh we we know uh from all of our
work in cancer that suinic acid suenate
is released by tumor cells and suinate
should never be uh released from the TCA
cycle. And the reason it's being
released is the second major waste
product of fermentation. It's through
the glutaminolysis pathway. So the
cancer cells are essentially
transitioning away from oxfos and and
moving towards a a fermentation
mechanism substrate level
phosphorilation. One one existing in the
cytoplasm the old the glycolytic pathway
the mden meerhoff parn pathway and the
other one is in the matrix of the
mitochondria itself and it's a
fermentation pathway. So, uh, what Derek
did in his PhD work, he he showed that
if you grow cells in in just glutamine,
no no, uh, um, no glucose and, uh, even
in hypoxia or when in the presence of
cyanide, you are still producing ATP and
producing suinic acid. So that that
pathway is is a second major pathway.
And and moreover, what we found is that
there's a powerful synergistic
parallelism between the glycolytic
pathway in the cytoplasm and the
fermentation glycolytic the the
glutaminolysis pathway in the
mitochondria. And the two pathways feed
off of each other leading to the
disregulation of the growth. Uh what we
also have to realize is that the control
of the cell cycle uh the checkpoints of
the cell cycle uh the resp the behavior
of cells with respect to one another uh
contact inhibition uh the the behavior
of cells in the relationship to their
neighbors is all linked to the calcium
currents uh that are controlled by the
mitochondrial associated membranes and
the outer surface of the mito
mitochondria er and mitochondrial
connections. All of that controls
whether or not a cell should remain
quscent or whether a cell should grow.
And if it does grow, it's a regulated
growth. And if that those calcium
currents linked to the inner membrane of
the mitochondria and the mitochondrial
associated membranes, if they're if
they're abnormal in any way, the cell
loses its growth control. It no longer
it no longer responds uh accurately to
environmental clue clues. So the the
checkpoints of the cell cycle which are
all controlled by calcium calm modulin
signaling. In other words, the
mitochondria control the destiny of the
cell. Um when you when you have this
kind of a behavior, the cells lose their
growth control. The cadherins that
normally would be involved in contact
inhibition uh no longer are working. And
then you also have in the morphagenetic
field itself there is communication
mitochondrial waves that that actually
link the behavior of cells across these
morphagenetic fields. All of this is is
related to how how uh the energy and the
integrity of the mitochondria work. And
as far as metastasis is concerned, we we
know that all metastatic cancers share
characteristics with macrofasages. And
macrofasages are genetically programmed
to move in and out of tissues, live in
the circulation. And when when we have a
a disordered growth in the micro
environment, you have inflammation and
normal macrofasages come in as wound
healing cells. They fuse with cancer
stem cells forming these hybrid cells.
So they they have also abnormal energy
metabolism, but they're genetically
programmed to move in and out of
bloodstream. So they they are rogue
macrofagages,
and we know how to kill them because
they're so dependent on glutamine and
and glucose. So, so our therapeutic
strategy which is ketogenic metabolic
therapy press pulse where we we press
down glucose with diet and exercise
elevate ketones for the h the
enhancement of mitochondrial function in
normal non-neoplastic cells and then we
come in with uh drugs uh that will
target uh the glutamine. So if you shut
there's no way these cells can grow uh
without glucose and glutamine. We've
interrogated the cells. Uh we've asked
Derek did a very beautiful work on just
going through all the amino acids and
all the fuels that cells can possibly
use and they're dependent heavily on
glucose and glutamine. And when you
target that in people with metastatic
cancer and mice with metastatic cancer,
you slaughter these tumor cells. So, so
we know basically how cancer starts. Uh
we we know what it's dependent on and
and we know pretty much how to manage
it. and and now we go into the clinic
and we start treating people with um
these pancreatic cancers, prostate
cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer, and
we're starting to see when you do it the
right way, uh the way Thomas Dai here
and and our groups have been divining,
you start to see people living so much
longer with a higher quality of life. We
never say cure, we only say management
because we don't know how long a person
will remain in a managed state. Uh and
as a matter of fact, we have people that
whose tumors never go away. They for
years and years, but they're indolent.
We've we've transformed them from a very
aggressive neoplasm into an indolent
where they can be periodically reected.
We did that with a brain cancer patient
lived uh uh over 10 years having
periodic debulkings. Um we never
targeted his glutamine, but we just kept
the tumor in a kind of an indolent
state. Um, so we we know we're seeing
really remarkable uh outcomes in the
clinic uh based on our new understanding
uh of of of how this all works. Now, of
course, I've just summarized massive
amounts of of data um and the
experimental evidence is in our in our
papers and Derek is here and Thomas
Durai is here. Thomas is doing both the
basic research and clinical work. and
Derek uh has has uh uh defined the
mitochondrial um substrate level
phosphorilation as a major force in
driving these tumor cells. So So that
gives you kind of an overview of of
where we are and what we're doing with
this with this cancer thing.
[clears throat]
>> Amazing. Um were you going to um you
guys want to show any slides at all or
are we just we're we're talking from
here? Um well I guess I could show you
some slides on a screen share. Uh
>> yeah only only if you want
>> because I didn't want to give I didn't
want to give a formal presentation but I
certainly can show you some of the um
slides. Let me see we had some here
yesterday. Uh you know give a big
lecture on this but um I kind of given
it in a nutshell. Uh let's see here. Uh,
Carol, Cindy, Carol.
Um, let me go back here and just dot
Margaret here. Okay. So, um, can can we
can you see this? I don't know. I guess
we have to do a slide up.
>> You can share. Just Yeah, just share
your screen.
>> Uh, let me see here. Share. Okay. Right
here.
All right. Can you see that, Mike?
>> Yep. There we go.
>> Okay. So, let me just
>> go for it. Go for it.
>> Okay. Well, we I I always give, you
know, tell you how many people are
dying. You know, I I I I don't um I
don't know if that's really important
for us. Um but I do go through all the
scientific theories. Um because what
we're doing, we're changing the whole
what cancer actually is. And you know,
whenever you change the theory, um like
when you go from geocentrism to
helioentrism, I mean, the whole you get
massive paradigm changes in in man's
knowledge. uh and we're going to do the
same thing when it when it comes to
cancer because we found that it's not a
genetic disease. You know, we use p uh
lewis pastor compared to Galen uh we do
the Darwin Wallace theory of evolution,
you know, as opposed to special
creation. So when we look at the
mitochondria and cancer, you see all the
nice squiggly green. This is a
highlighting how how these are a very
dynamic organel. they have fision and
fusion and and they really they really
uh regulate the entire physiology uh of
the cell um through uh through their
interactions not only within the cell
but outside the cell. So the the
question that we're we're confronted now
of course is is cancer a genetic disease
or a mitochondrial metabolic disease and
you know this paper by Hannah Hannah
Weinberg yeah I think it's the most
highly cited like 75,000 or something
like this you know they clearly state
that cancer is a genetic disease you
know and and it's a silent assumption
and people just automatically assume
because um you know they just say and we
go through and show you that the reason
why they say it
dogmatic ideology. It's no longer linked
to rational collection of data and and
let me let me so what we what we've done
is uh we find a number of papers where
you can't find any genetic mutations in
certain cancers. Um that's a big
problem. Now you can't prove anything by
you can't prove anything by negative
data but but you know Vogelstein and
others said oh no it's driver genes that
are the really bad ones. Well, well,
that caused disregulated cell growth.
But, but now we're seeing uh expression
of mutations in driver genes in normal
tissues of people uh p-53 and a number
of other mutations in cells that never
become disregulated in their growth. So,
you have cancers with no mutations,
driver genes in normal cells that don't
form disregulated growth. These are very
serious uh challenges to a to a
statement that cancer is a genetic
disease. And some carcinogens like
asbestous don't cause cancer. um don't
cause mutations, but they cause cancer.
You know, Aboriginal tribes, they rarely
have cancer. Our closest relatives,
chimps, no no breast cancer ever
recorded in a female chimp. Um the
nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments are pretty much the
strongest evidence against that. And we
like these experiments from Israel and
Schaefer. I don't know if you've seen
these. These are from University of
Vermont. Um he had a epithelial liver
liver cell that he isolated from the
liver of a rat grew it in vitro and it
became dysmorphic in the way it looked.
He took the cells and put them under the
skin of the rat. 12 out of 13 rats
developed the tumor. He didn't know if
it was something maybe the original cell
was tumoric. So what he did was he went
back uh grew up the original cells and
put them under the skin of rats and and
and he didn't see any can't zero out of
11 questioned whether uh the formation
of neoplasia would be due to the
mutations in the nucleus or some nuclear
event or a cytoplasmic event like
mitochondria. So he simply swapped
nuclei. So he was able to take the
nucleus of the tumor cell and put it
into the cytoplasm of the normal
non-neoplastic cell and swap put the
nucleus of the normal cell into the
cytoplasm of the tumor cell. And they
got results that would be directly
opposite those that you would have been
predicted if cancer would due to
mutations in the nucleus. Here the
nuclear the the the the tumor nucleus in
in the cytoplasm of the normal cell
produced only one out of 72 rats
experiments whereas the normal nucleus
in the tumor cytoplasm produced 66 out
of 68. These are just the opposite of
what you would have expected if cancer
were due to sematic mutations. Um also
McKenna did a very similar kind of thing
in vivo in frogs. the luck frog. He took
the the it's this a lethal kidney
cancer. Kills the frogs. He took he
takes the cells out of the frog,
separates the cell individually and then
uh uh isolates the nucleus of the of the
tumor cell and implants it into an
enucleated fertilized frog egg. And he
was able to clone tadpoles uh all grown
from the nucleus
of of of the kidney tumor. And and when
I spoke to him, he said, "Well, I could
cut the tails off these tadpoles." And
they immediately grew a new tail in
exactly regulated way uh directed by the
nucleus of a tumor cell which came from
a cell that had a cell that was that
that was disregulated in its cell
growth. And I and I said to him, I says,
"That's because it's not a genetic
disease." And he said he absolutely
agreed. He was before he passed away, it
were long talks with him. And then of
course Rudy down Rudy Yanish down here
at MIT he cloned uh from a mice from the
nuclei of melanoma and he also showed
now these things would abort um they
wouldn't grow to completion a whole
mouse uh because they had a number of
chromosomeal mutation uh abnormalities
and other mutations but they never form
disregulated cell growth um when when
you're looking at that all of these are
inconsistent with with um cancer as a
metabolic disease or a genetic disease.
And of course, I wrote this big paper
summarizing all of this. And this this
figure now appar
the the literature. It's a it's a
summary of dozens and dozens of invivo
and in vitro experiments
um replicated over and over again and uh
and normal cells beget normal cells.
They have they have a clean genome and
they have normal and functional
mitochondria. Tumor cells beget tumor
cells. Now they do have genetic
abnormalities in the nucleus and they
have abnormalities number structure and
function of mitochondria. When you place
the nucleus of the tumor cell into the
cytoplasm of the normal cell, you get
regulated growth, not disregulated
growth. But when you place the normal
nucleus into the cytoplasm of the tumor
cell, you either get dead cells or cells
with disregulated growth. These are the
exact opposite. this when you look at
all of these data together, what I've
just gone through, it you have to be
cognitively impaired to think that
cancer could be a gene-driven
phenomenon. It's not a gene-driven
phenomenon. And and and you know, I
blasted the NIH, the National Cancer
Institute. Um we we write letters and
say, "Who's who's who's running the ship
down there?" Because they say cancer,
how does cancer? Cancer is a genetic
disease. and and people are writing them
and saying the evidence the theory
doesn't the data now no longer support
this and they mindlessly go through the
process uh saying it is uh and not not
carefully evaluating the data that says
it can so I I view them as like the grey
lag geese that they're mind they just do
mindless things uh without any
connection to reality uh so and I go
after them uh about that because the
evidence is not there so we I told you
Warberg uh uh had this pegged. He knew,
but he didn't know all of the stuff that
we now know. And Derek kind of cleared
up a lot of this mess. So, the cells
ferment glutamine. Um this is the second
major ferment fermentable fuel. And all
major cancers have oxos insufficiency
linked to glucose and glutamine
fermentation which is the common we see
it everywhere. Um and then if you look
at the at the structure of the
mitochondria in cancer this is gly
glyopblasto
um you have the stripes the christe we
also we've never found cancer with
normal content or composition of
cardiolipin the major lipid that
controls the electron transport chain
abnormal in all major cancers the
structure is abnormal in all major
cancers what I find Mike is that you and
I and we most biologists know that
structure determines function um this is
a foundational principle of biology. It
seems like bi people, everybody except
oncologists seem to know this. They all
say mitochondria are normal in cancer.
They I don't know when they look at
these pictures. What do they think?
Here's breast cancer. Nice stripes and
and a normal breast um normal breast
cells abnormal mitochondria facilization
in the cancer. Colarctal cancers have
ghost mitochondria. I went through and
showed all the different cancers
abnormalities, number structure and
function of mitochondria. All major
cancers have accumulation of lipid
drops. Cancer cells can't burn lipids or
card or or um beta hydroxybutyrate
ketone body because if they do they'll
produce reactive oxygen species blow up
and die. So so they store lipids in the
cytoplasm as a protective mechanism
against death from reactive oxygen
species. And we see that there's a a bio
this is a a a signature of oxfos
insufficiency when you see lipid drops
and there's some beautiful studies that
I can explain to how they prove that
these lipid drops are there because the
mitochondria defective uh not the
reverse. So I always go through to help
people know most of the energy we get is
from oxfos with CO2 and water as the
predominant waste products. When you
look at cancer the waste products are
lactic acid and suinic acid. So these
are the waste products of of glucose and
and glutamine fermentation. And we know
that because we've measured it, Derek
and others, we've a lot of us measured
it. We know that the oxygen consumption
in cancer cells, they consume oxygen,
but it's it's not uh largely connected
to ATP production. It's create they
actually connect to Ross reactive oxygen
species. We did we showed this in in eye
science. um you can transition uh away
from ox this is a gradual process it
doesn't happen overnight so clearly it's
a it's a slow progression away from from
oxfos and a replacement using substrate
level phosphorilation
there's a direct relationship between
how how much energy from substrate level
phosphorilation how malignant the tumor
is so the malignancy to fermentation is
so strong it's a it's an absolute uh
very strong uh linkage. Uh we have a
threshold here because we think there
there's a point when it becomes
irreversible when you can no longer uh
recover a sick can a cell on this and uh
it's an arbitrary threshold. We're not
really sure might differ from different
cancers different types. Um this is what
Derek put together. Um whe when when you
when you have glucose and glutamine
coming through the two major glycolytic
and and glutaminolysis pathways, the
byproducts of these pathways cross
connect and thereby you can produce
tremendous biomass, very rapid growth uh
uh as long as you have these two fuels
working together in a singic way. It's
unbelievable. Uh they'll they'll survive
a little bit and grow a little bit on
glucose alone and the same thing with
glutamine alone. Boy, when you put the
two together, they just explode with
with growth. And and lactic acid and
suinic acid are the metabolic waste
products. They they um acidify the
extracellular micro environment
preventing preventing uh radiation,
chemo, imunotherapies from working
effectively because you've acidified.
Suxinic acid also paralyzes the immune
system to prevent it from um from from
spreading from um uh from immune system
killing. This is a very important uh 100
summarizes a 100 years of cancer
research. So we know what causes cancer.
The paradox any number of environmental
or even the rare inherited mut germline
mutations we showed that we have a big
paper just came out they all damage
oxfos in one way or another all of these
inflammations anka genes carcinogens
intermittent hypoxia they all produce
reactive oxygen species causing the
mutations in the nucleus the
chromosomeal abnormalities the pro point
mutations all that's downstream effects
um the retrograde signal system that
mitochondria signal a nucleus you got to
turn on open the floodgates HIF1 alpha
mick open the floodgates to glucose and
glutamine so you can then drive the
disregulated growth and the energy
metabolism um all of these and son and
Sheen and Sado they love to talk about
the default state the the the default
state of of of cells is proliferation
she's they've done a beautiful job on
that um the default energy state is
fermentation so uh the default so you
have a def and that's linked to the
disregulated cell growth because It's
the calcium currents controlled by the
mitochondria that control the cell cycle
and the cell cycle is no longer under
control. So the cells fall back on their
default state which is proliferation
driven by a fermentation metabolism. So
we went through and showed a sustained
angioen all of these things can be all
tracked back to mitochondrial
dysfunction. And then of course for
metastasis it's a fusion hybridization
between a a macrofage microglea and a
cancer stem cell forming a hybrid cell.
And this hybrid cell now is driven by
glucose and glutamine. And we now know
how to kill and manage metastatic
cancer. We've actually we've shown that
in the mouse beautifully and we've shown
it now we're seeing it in humans. Now
this is Derek's big paper here. Amino
acid glucose fermentation maintain the
content ATP. So he he really did a
magnificent job. We worked with Christo
Chinopoulos, world expert on on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. And then we published
this big paper on the Warberg hypothesis
and the emergence of the mitochondrial
metabolic theory. Uh Tom Dorai here is
showing you how how um um um the the the
uh the difference between crab tree
effects and and uh Warberg effects and
the the confusion that everybody's made
with the War talking about Warberg
effects. So So you know now if we know
what to do, how do we manage it? What we
need to do is we need to lower blood
sugar. We need to elevate ketone bodies.
You can do that water only fasting
calorie calorie restriction. Um there's
a lot of ways you can do that. This is
one of our early work with burner
mukaji. Just by cutting calories high
you you just by cutting a high
carbohydrate diet down by 40% which is
like water only fasting in human you get
a huge reduction in tumor growth. Um we
we know that when you lower blood sugar
each of these mouse under a different
diet when you lower blood sugar ketone
bodies go up. Evolutionary conserved
adaptation to food restriction. And when
blood sugar goes down, the size of the
tumors go down. And now we did this
first. We were the first ones to do this
in the mouse. Now all major cancers, if
you want, people are now looking at pro
prostate, colon cancer, all these
cancers, breast cancer. When people have
high blood sugar, uh overall survival is
generally much reduced. Tumors grow much
faster. So when you put the p the
patient or the animal into a state of
nutritional ketosis, you reduce
inflammation, angioenesis, you actually
kill tumor cells. This is our this is
we're going to this is going to be the
new tool Derek is working on. We're
working on a the glucose ketone index.
You measure the molar ratio miller ratio
of glucose to ketones and you get a
quantitative biioarker that's linked to
managing and preventing cancer. And
we've defined 2.0 zero or below a as a
as a biioarker for killing and managing
cancer. We developed the press. This
will be the new standard of care for
cancer once people come to realize that
it's a mitochondrial metabolic problem.
So we press down glucose with ketone
supplements, stress management, exercise
and all this kind of stuff. And then we
bring in targeting specific lowd dose
targeting of glucose and glutamine.
Hyperbaric oxygen will kill tumor cells
when the patient is in nutritional
ketosis. And right now our group and the
group that we work with uh we're we're
perfecting dosage timing and scheduling.
So we bring people from sick to manage
state and and with improvements we we we
are hoping to get uh resolution on this
proof of principle a very aggressive
glyopblasto. Uh this is the VM3 mouse
natural spontaneous glyopblasto. We
showed how we managed by targeting
glutamine with this drug Dawn and
putting the animals into a
calorierestricted ketogenic diet, we
could get tremendous increase in overall
survival. And again, all this the papers
that Pera put out, all the information
is in the main paper. But the blue line
is is high carbohydrate by itself. Uh
the the the green is diet by itself. The
red is drug dawn by itself. And when you
it's when you put the drug and the diet
together, you get long-term survival.
And we're seeing really much more
improved overall survival. How does it
work in humans? Well, let's show you
some evidence. This is a glyopblasto
from human. Um, you can't cut these out
and every people it's very deadly tumor.
And the purple cells are are the tumor
cells around blood vessels. They spread
throughout the whole neoortex. So, you
can't you can't really uh surgically
rect glyoplast.
I always like to show these curves.
These are the survival curves. You know,
we have a problem in science today. Half
half the stuff in the cancer field can't
be reproduced uh when you go and try to
reproduce it. But one thing can be
reproduced and that's how how how fast
glyobblasto kills you. These are the
data from five different surgical
institutions and you can see the
standard of care what they use. Uh very
few people survive uh beyond 40 months
and I said no improvement in 100 years.
Bailey and Cushing 1926 8 to 8 to 14
months with with no therapy. Today with
all the stuff we we we get 18 to 17
months almost no no improvement. And I
always show people why because when you
irdiate the brain of cancer patients you
free up massive amounts. You break apart
the glutamine glutamate cycle freeing up
mass amounts of glutamine. Uh you give
steroids to because the brain swells
from that uh from the radiation. This
makes hypoglycemia and you get high
glutamine and this patients die from a
combination of bad tumor together with
the absurdity of trying to treat them.
Um the crazy way they're doing it. So we
tried this on a guy from Egypt's a one
of our first clinical papers. Um this is
the corn guy. He he was 28 years old. He
had glyopblasto. We put him on a
metabolic therapy a weight cranottomy.
We pushed radiation radiation off for
three months. They wanted to push the
radiation after a couple of weeks. After
this we said no and then they eventually
had to irdiate and give him timolomide.
Uh he he did well. He was doing good.
Then about 2930 he had some headaches
and things and he died. Um but we did a
Elsaka did an autopsy on his brain uh to
see what was going on and they didn't
find tumor cells. He died from radiation
induced brain liquefification necrosis.
So he was killed uh by the treatment
rather than by the tumor. Um we always
like to showcase reports of p people who
who have suffered immensely like this
young girl Britney diagnosed with GBM in
2014. Here's her husband. Um she she
does the standard of care. You can see
her face is swollen. This is moonface
from highdose steroids meaning that her
blood sugar levels are going to be very
high. She decides she doesn't want to
live anymore. She wants to take her own
life. My dis. So, she goes into People
magazine. Britney, 29 years old, plans
to end her own life. In three weeks, she
goes to Oregon, dies with dignity uh
with her family. Uh it's bad. As I
always say, it's bad when your patients
kill themselves rather than go through
the treatment you're offering them. Now,
this is our man here, Pablo. Uh Thomas
and I, we've all spoke to Pablo. We knew
him really well. Nice guy. He came to me
in 2014. He was one of these purest
guys. He didn't want any radiation. No
chemo, no steroids, nothing. Um, and
they said, "Oh, you're going to be dead.
You're going to be dead in 9 to 12
months if you don't do uh radiation and
chemo." They told him his tumor was
inoperable. He he didn't want to do it.
He didn't want to do anything. He he
survived for uh 10 years. Um u and here
here he is. Here's his tumor. When it
was first uh detected, they said it was
inoperable. Um he did metabolic therapy
for a couple of years and you can see
how big the tumor became. It it but it
it was indolent because these tumors
will kill you in months. This was years.
So we told him, "Yeah, take it out." So
he went in and got it to bulk. Uh and um
he did really well. Then we measured we
have five years of five years of of
measurements from his blood glucose
ketone and and can you believe this? So
a a massive amount of data on this one
person and then we recalculated
his uh doing the GKI. So we take the
ratio of blood sugar to blood ketones
and you can see we replotted his GKI.
Look how low it was. Beautiful. So he he
was managed predominantly by metabolic
therapy. Um uh and not only did uh Pablo
let me see now Pablo here he is here. um
he died. We had Thomas and I had a long
conversation with him a week before he
passed away. He was laughing. We were
having a good time and um very sharp
guy. Uh he we we told him why why are
you going to do this? He said I think we
can get out the remaining uh we were
laughing predominantly because he was
going for his fourth surgical procedure
for a tumor which he which they
originally told him was was uh
inoperable and yet now he's going for.
So we had a lot of laughs about that. Uh
he came out of the surgery really good.
Thumbs up. He had a big conversation
with his wife all that day. Um but he
died that night from uh from a cerebral
hemorrhage as the result of the surgery.
So he never died from the tumor. He
lived 122 months if you can believe
this. This is our most recent study out
of Greece uh where my colleagues uh did
standard of care timolomide radiotherapy
and teolomide radiotherapy with
ketogenic metabolic therapy. So you can
see this tremendous difference. So uh
four out of six of the guys and this
diet wasn't bad. It was salmon, uh olive
oil, sardines, um avocado and some of
these kinds of things whereas these guys
just ate the standard diet. Um and only
one one out of 12 survived three three
years whereas four four out of six
survived three years or longer. Um these
guys we talked to him. Some of these
guys refused to give up uh their sugar.
They said I'd rather die than give up my
sugar. And and they they did die. So um
so that's their choice. But you can see
how powerful metabolic therapy is in
managing these cancer. This is another
little guy from um this is Danny Sheen
from Marshfield, Massachusetts.
um diagnosed with pinealoblast.
Uh look at his face all swollen from
steroids. Here he is a week before he
died. Um surgery, radiation, all the
same they give to these little
kids. It's tragic. They don't I mean
it's just so terrible what they're doing
to these kids. So we developed recently
have a big paper that's going to come
out in um in uh what's the name of that
the journal we have? It's um
>> uh cell cell reports medicine. Yeah,
cell reports medicine. This is going
it's under it's provisionally accepted.
So we took we took um the glyopblastoma
cells and we put them into pediatric
young mice 20 20 days old representing
what basically what Danny Sheen was. So
here you see the the the guys that that
are uh the control guys. Now here's we
had restricted ketogenic diet uh Don and
and bendazol. This is a um parasite
medication targets glutamine. So, uh, we
target glutamine and glucose at the same
time. And these damn mice live so much
longer. You they're higher quality of
life. It's just so much different. Uh,
this is a person, Robin. She's still
alive with us today. She was diag she
had um from Cleveland, Ohio. She had
breast cancer that metastasized to her
lungs and brain and femur and her bones.
And they gave her they said there's
nothing more we can do. all the standard
of care stuff wasn't working. Uh she got
on a plane and went to our colleague. We
have a big clinic over there in
Istanbul, Turkey where we're using
metabolic therapy. He put her on
metabolically supported chemo. What you
do is you bring you bring in very low
dose of chemo when you're in state of
nutritional ketosis. And look at uh all
of this disappeared that the the
infiltration that the metastasis was all
killed. Uh Robin uh Robin this was 2025
but we're talking with Slokum recently.
We're going to read right up. She's
still doing really well. We're going to
do a big follow-up seven years out now.
Um, and we got a lung cancer guy who's
still alive. Um, this guy was destined.
This is funny. This guy, uh, Adam
Amodatus, uh, he had lung cancer to his
brain and his liver and everything. And
my my colleague, Thanos, even Julio
said, "We're going to put him on a
highfat diet." And the and one of the
attending, uh, oncologist said, "Oh, you
got to be careful. He'll have elevated
cholesterol and that will be bad." The
guy the guy was going to be dead in
three weeks for Christ's sake. And
they're worried about elevated
cholesterol. The guy's still alive. He's
still alive today with a little bit of
dysipidemia, but he's alive. We works
tremendous in prostate cancer. And this
is Thomas Dai's big paper here with all
the folks that are now participating in
managing cancer. We have a framework, a
ketogenic metabolic framework for
managing glyopblasto. Um, and we have a
lot of nutritionists, dieticians, basic
scientists, clinicians. They all want to
get on board now and start working this
out. Um, and here's I always like to
show our dog. Uh, we we we we put a
metabolic therapy on a dog that was
destined for death. He had a big mass
cell tumor under his nose. Here's his
face, nose. And, uh, the woman just
followed what we said. She cut the
calories down, gave the dog raw chicken
with the bone still in the meat, some
some fish oil, and some raw egg. cut the
calories down and the to the tumor just
melted off the dog's face. Um uh the
doctor said, "You're gonna have to have
it cut off the vet and and radiation.
Dog's going to get real sick, get
diarrhea and everything." They they
didn't do any of that. And um no
surgery, no radiation, no chemo. What
happens is when you take animals and
people and you fast them, the body will
attack the tumor and use the tumor as
fuel for the rest of the body. It's
called autoolytic cannibalism. This dog
died from old age. The cancer never came
back. It it lived 15 and a half years a
pitbull and uh it died from cardio
cardiac failure from old age. Never the
cancer never came back. So you know we
say people say terminal cancer. It's not
terminal. We know now we can keep people
alive if you do it the right way. And we
published this big paper with Christos
and myself uh showing that the somatic
mutation theory is essentially like the
geocentrism
depence equals
trying to figure out and now if we just
if we move the mitochondria to the
center of the problem you're going to
have a much greater opportunity to
manage cancer because it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder. So I I
just conclude by by by I went through
this kind of fast. Um, you know, I spend
a whole this this I give a course a
whole semester on this to the students
so they can really dive deep into the
science supporting supporting all this
stuff. And then of course um we're
starting Thomas and I and and we're
starting this new international society
of metabolic oncology where uh
clinicians and dieticians are all
getting together. We're going to
standardize treatment for cancer based
on cancer being a mitochondrial
metabolic disease. We we have to work
out some of the dosage timing and
scheduling issues. Uh we're trying to
formulate the society right now and um
you know and right now all of our
funding all the funding that supports my
research in this lab is philanthropy and
private foundations. We we don't get
money from the NIH. Uh we we're getting
a lot of people coming on board who just
want to see this happen. And uh and and
we have a lot of case reports that are
under under work right now. more and
more people will be uh will be
publishing this. We're not ready to do a
large clinical trial because because we
because the only way we can do that is
is we do it. Thomas, myself, and Derek,
uh we're the ones that do this because
we're the only ones that really
understand all the nuances. But we're
trying to train these physicians to bit
know better what to do and how to do it.
And the dieticians as well, they need to
know what kind of foods uh they should
be using. Once we once we have that,
then we're going to run bigger bigger
trials and that's the the goal of this
new society. So we're we're we're we're
in the plan to drop the death rate on
this disease. No question about it. The
biggest problem we stand in the way is
that the the world at NIH think it's a
genetic disease. So as long as they
consider it a genetic disease, you're
not going to be able to make the kind of
advances that you need to make. Uh and
that's the biggest block right now. uh
and the NIH is part of the problem
rather than the solution. So, um until
they can get on board and recognize
what's going on, uh unfortunately, we're
going to have to suffer with 1700 people
a day dying from cancer or 626,000
this year that is predicted. So, so
that's where we stand and I've given you
uh kind of an overview, but to really do
a deeper dive, you really got to look at
the science, the control experiments
that we've done uh and how we've run all
these experiments and and and Tom is
here. Do Dur Derek did a lot of these
experiments, got his PhD on this. So,
they could answer any questions that you
might have on that.
>> Yeah, thanks very much. That's
remarkable. Um, absolutely remarkable.
Uh I I have I have one ba basic question
then probably want to ask bunch more
around the metabolism side but um you
mentioned at the beginning this this
notion of how the mitochondria
participate in the morphagenetic fields
that are sort of multi multisellular at
scale. Could you talk about that a
little because obviously that's we're
very interested in that. I I want to
understand what you're thinking about
the mitochondria.
>> Yeah. Well, we learned more about that
uh from Peicard uh from Columbia
University. He he's he's he's like one
of the leaders on on the communication
of mitochondria.
uh not only not only how they
communicate or how they regulate the
internal intraphysiological
state of the cell but I was surprised to
see from his work how they actually
commun communicated across different
cells uh and also through the
morphagenetic field itself uh through
regulatory bioenergetic signaling uh
which which to be honest with you
Michael I I I didn't know the the the
the the the how extensive the knowledge
is about how mitochondria communicate
across fields. Um and you know when
Sonen Sheen stood talk about the tissue
organizational field theory and how
cancer originates that way it's very
clear from the card's work how how you
could damage mitochondria in a group of
cells by by disrupting the morphagenetic
field itself. So, uh, that's kind of new
to me and we're still working that out.
What what was clear to us though within
the cell itself because ultimately what
starts is disregulated cell growth from
an individual cell, you know, dumping
out uh fermentation waste products. Um,
we knew this transition from ox to
fermentation uh was the key for driving
the disregulated growth. But what is the
what is the linkage to make the cell
disregulated in its growth? That was
what was most interesting and that
relates to the calcium signaling and the
control of the cell cycle. But then it
goes beyond that. It goes like why the
cells are no longer responding to the
cues from the environment. Why they lost
contact inhibition and that's the
calcium controls kherins on the surface
of the cells. So, but then I started
looking more and picard saying you
you've got a communication signaling
between not only internal and and a few
cells outside. You got the whole there
there's a way through water channels and
all kinds of things that were unknown to
me about how mitochondria control the
overall bioenergetic system of the of
the whole body itself because they've
all derived from a population of
mitochondria in the in the fertilized
egg. The egg itself comes it's a
maternal system and they all become
slightly different in different organs
like liver is a little bit different
than brain from kidney depending on what
they have but they all have a
commonality and how they work and they
communicate throughout the whole body
through fields I I was shocked about
this so when we look at chronic diseases
uh you know we see obesity type two
diabetes coronary we see
neuroscychiatric problems dementia
cancer all of these are are
mitochondrial failures. All all of these
are are are are attacked on the
mitochondrial function. So we're
learning about that and I think the best
answer to know more about that would be
to look up the work of Peicard. He's
he's discussed this in great detail uh
about how these how these uh these cells
communicate with each other through
mitochondrial bioenergetic linkages and
signaling like this. So we're we're
starting to put this together in a
bigger in a more broader way. Uh and he
and as he says, you know, the the
powerhouse of the cell is just that one
little bit of people that people talk
about, but what he's talking about is an
an allgether new kind of networking uh
that exists uh for general health and uh
and and and and what we call metabolic
homeostasis throughout organs and
systems. all linked to this one the
capability of this one organel and that
organel controls uh how genes are turned
on and turned off in the nucleus. So uh
through epigenetic signaling the
mitochondria control what the nucleus is
doing uh from one cell to the other. So
I I think we're learning a lot more
about this. So um this is this is the
new horizon. I think this is going to be
really important.
So I I just want to say this is awesome.
Um I h I'm a I'm a big mitochondria fan.
My when I uh did my PhD it was metabolic
engineering for hydrogen production. So
I did a lot of fermentation experiments
and uh you know trying to get increased
hydrogen and I think uh I've always kind
of kept in mind the metabolism and what
was going on and and looking at the
mitochondria specifically. So, uh,
everything that you're saying is
resonating with things that I've read
and and, uh, you know, what I've looked
into. I've I've also found that the
mitochondria communicate across the cell
membranes with one another. So, they
have direct communication with
mitochondria that are on opposing
membranes, which I thought was really
fascinating. Um, one of the things that
I'm also interested in is of course, you
know, we work with bioelectric
modulation with a lot of different drugs
uh that that change different ion
channels and their function. Um, one of
the things that we're seeing is, uh,
that mitochondria have their own ion
channels and potassium channels and, you
know, calcium channels, of course, uh,
but some of those channels are really
important for the function of the
mitochondria. And so, uh, you know, it's
in preprint right now, so I can go ahead
and tell you the name of the drug, but,
uh, we're working with chopilium, which
is a a potassium, uh, channel blocker,
but it's not just a potassium channel
blocker. It of course has all these
other promiscuous effects on different
channels, but one of the things that
it's been known for is that it can
change uh the metabolic output of
mitochondria. So it switches them uh I
think more towards a pentos phosphate
pathway uh metabolism um the cells and
also apparently uh increases the pH
around the the cell. So they're
producing some other you know
fermentation product from it. But what
they did find with it is uh plugg
defects where you basically you have uh
impaired mitochondrial biogenesis. If
you add cholofillium to those models,
you actually increase the mitochondrial
output. So it increases mitochondrial uh
biogenesis and it also increases the
oxidative phosphorilation. So it
increased in my my work uh it increased
the membrane potential of the
mitochondria over time. So there's, you
know, I think there's things that our
ion channel drugs are doing to the
mitochondria and may actually be
directly working on the metabolism of
the mitochondria. And it'd be really
great to like work with you guys uh to
analyze those effects and also to screen
different compounds that we work with to
see what they do to those metabolic
outputs. And you know, we don't I don't
have any equipment here. I think you
know all the mitochondrial studies
usually you know you isolate the
mitochondria and then you do the
experiments on the isolated
mitochondria. All we have are bio
sensors. So you know we have calcium uh
uh we have ROS uh and then we can also
look at turnover uh with the
mitochondria but it'd be great to work
with you guys if you have the
specialized equipment to do uh you know
the isolation and to actually look at
what's going on uh when we block those
ion channels.
>> Yeah. Well, we haven't um when Mike
Keebish was working in my lab, he's the
senior scientist for Berg. um he
isolated and purified the mitochondria
out of the uh out of the cells. It's a
it's a laborious kind of a of a thing,
but we're we're going to be doing doing
that. We also um we're going to be
trying to do mitochondrial transfer uh
from that's another thing that we're
we're we plan to be working on too is is
um seeing whether we can reverse
pathology by it's like putting a new
engine in your car, you know. Can can
you can you can you uh transform
everything back to a normal state by
removing or putting a new new a new
engine into the system? But that sounds
interesting. Um the the potassium
channel blockers and what that what that
might be doing uh for sure. Um the
answer is we don't know. Uh we would
have to look at the systems that we
have. Um you know with respect how did
you measure oxidative phosphorilation?
Did you
>> So we're looking at the membrane
potential of the mitochondria. So it was
the far red divided by green basically
right. So you just you you take the uh
deep red uh mito deep red which
basically looks at the potential and
then you divide it by the mid view green
which looks at the the amount of
mitochondria and then that gives you
what your uh mitochondrial potential is.
by by looking at um a
>> Was this in a are you doing this in a in
like a cancer cell model or
>> Yeah.
>> colon cancer cells
>> isolated mitochondria or just just just
>> No, this is in the cells intact cells.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I was actually pretty
surprised because I thought, you know,
if if this was causing some ROS buildup,
you know, then I would see a decrease in
the mitochondrial potential from some
sort of uncoupling, you know, but I
didn't see that at all. And then I found
these papers on PLOG uh mutations and
how cholium even at low concentrations
was rescuing these PLOG defects. So,
it's definitely doing something to the
mitochondria to make them more
effective.
Well, I I think this would be sort of
the topic of of discussion that that we
could have. You know, in in our view, if
you already have a cancer cell line,
then the mitochondria are definitely
there. Uh you know, depending on on on
the model. But in our view, uh oxidative
phospholation itself would be
insufficient to alone on its own to to
keep uh proliferation active. And that's
why they they shift to fermentation. So,
so it's you know you can wi within a
model you can increase or decrease
different parameters of of what you
would call oxos you know oxidative
phosphatilation through different
measurements you know you could probably
if you measure oxygen consumption with
with your treatment maybe it goes up uh
but that doesn't really tell us much
about sort of the the functional
adaptability of of those [clears throat]
cells to to different fuels or whether
oxidative phospholation would be
sufficient to to keep them proliferating
in order to keep them alive as you would
see in a normal cell. And then then you
would need like a like a positive
control with with a normal cell perhaps.
Uh that would be uh you know much better
comparison with a normal cell and a
tumor cell.
>> Yeah. I mean we we have just scratched
the surface on mitochondrial stuff like
right now it's it's you know
proliferation and membrane potential
that we've looked at and we haven't
looked at you know any other uh parts of
that but I would love to look at that
because I think these ion channels that
uh you know we're we're blocking with
these with these compounds that are very
promiscuous and hitting all sorts of
different ion channels and I think that
they may be hitting mitochondrial ion
channels in some cases. And if that's
the case, you know, what what does that
do uh to the energetics and is it
something that could potentially boost
uh metabolic therapy?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I I I wonder in in cell
culture and I think this also was
discussed in in one of Dr. Sleven papers
is sort of I I guess from your
perspective the the bio energetic field
or or sort of the connection in cell
culture is already sort of altered
somehow. you know they are not part of a
larger morphogenetic field but they they
sort of grow out of control in in a you
know 2D plane. Uh uh so so maybe
extrapolating from that to the invivo
system is is also complicated despite
you know I think we could learn what
happens inside the cell um but but
making the connection to to the larger
tissue is is is difficult from that.
>> Absolutely. Yeah. I you know I'm 100%
with you on that. Um, one of the things
that I've been really trying to work on
is developing a better in vitro model.
Uh, something that is more, you know,
uh, clinically relevant. So, we use, uh,
a bunch of of different, um, cell lines.
So we use the cancer cell line, we use
endothelial cells, and then we use
fiberblasts all from that same tissue
and then mix those together, make a
spheroid, embed that in a fibbrin gel
that has humanmal fiberblasts that
excrete the growth factors that are
necessary for the endothelial cells to
actually start sprouting. So it's like a
very complex multisellular
uh model that you can go ahead and and
kind of get more of what the tumor micro
environment would look like in that
area, right? And then you could even,
you know, go even further than that and
and look at, you know, what natural
pillar cells are going to be doing in
those types of systems and things. But
that's about as close as you can get
unless you're constantly doing, you
know, animal studies. And we've got that
system down pat. I mean it's it's really
it's a beautiful system and so you can
see things like intervisation, you can
see angioenesis
um you know and you can see
proliferation of the of the cancer cells
themselves in that type of a system.
>> So we could potentially look into that.
>> Yeah, absolutely. I I think there's some
basic sort of uh metabolic requirements
that that cells need in general and
cancer cells in particular. you know,
you know, it's not often discussed, but
like most in in vitro studies, you do
need either serum substitutes or or
dialy serum or something for for the
cells to actually divide otherwise they
just sit there. Uh so so there is some
growth factors and other things. I I
know that's the whole discussion about
the default state of of the cell. But if
if some of those things are missing, the
cell just simply cannot cannot progress
through through the cell cycle and and
through proliferation. And the same for,
you know, if you're going to be
combining different cell types and and
they all secrete different things into
the the micro environment, might get a
little complicated to to to measure all
all these things uh in in such a system,
but but it could definitely be
interesting to to see how they behave if
they behave differently from uh from
just a uh cell culture system.
>> I I have a question perhaps for uh for
Michael. uh I I I saw most of most of
the work on on cancer that that your
group has been doing it's been uh you
know focusing more on sort of non-malian
systems uh in the past uh I know you had
that uh that paper where where you
overexpress kas uh I think it was in
xagus levy and and then with the
deolarization you could control sort of
the the proliferation
uh and and melanocytes I also seen uh
seen some papers
And is that because these models are
sort of more available in your group or
is is it perhaps uh you know like a
evolutionary disconnect when you go from
you know these are invertebrates or or
or I I wouldn't say uh less uh
specialized vertebrates but uh you know
perhaps the mamalian uh systems through
evolution sort of we we lost the
capacity for regeneration to to sort of
hyperspecialize the tissues or or
something like that where it's perhaps
more difficult to alter some of these
bio bioelectric fields or bio electric
states or is it simply that that uh you
know you you're working on it but you
haven't got to to these systems yet
I think you muted
>> sorry about that yeah um there's a
couple of things certainly we are moving
into into mammals and human tissue so as
as Wanita's prior work and she has some
papers coming soon that you'll see um
Yeah, we're absolutely going into into
mammals. We've also done work on breast
cancer with Maline Uden and um and and
some other collaborators. Uh no, no, I
don't think there's any evolutionary um
issue here. I think I think the basic
mechanisms are very highly conserved. Uh
but one of the reasons that we do like
Zanopus and some other regenerative
systems is that I as I think you put
your finger on it, I think I think the
regenerative kinds of responses are
exactly what we need to normalize cells.
And I we we also have a part of our lab
does um regenerative medicine kind of
approaches to try to try to induce
regeneration in mammals. And I susp so
so we hope we want to get it working
there. We think we think it can. There
are there are mammals that are that have
you know um so you know deer antlers and
and spiny mice and things like this. But
uh but but we you know I I certainly
think we can we can get it activated and
I think that would ultimately be
basically the overall the kind of
treatment that you would have. It would
be a re a regenerative response that
would grab really strong morphagenetic
control but also metabolic control and
so on over the over these cells. So yeah
um you know we treated it as a as a kind
of a stepping stone because the
optogenetics and everything else that we
did was much easier to do in Zenipus. So
so we we kind of showed proof of concept
there and now we're moving into into
into mammals and and humans. So that's
the that's the future work with with
with oneita and others.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. I I've seen uh
you know uh you you probably know this
paper. I just wanted to ask out of
curiosity that was Rose and and Welling
for uh where they put the the frog tumor
into like a salamander uh limp and then
they amputated the the limb with the
tumor in the middle and that sort of as
it was growing sort of integrated and
normalized the
>> uh the tumor and uh I I've seen you
cited that paper a couple of times and I
I was just out of curiosity thinking
whether something similar couldn't be
done because I was discussing it with a
colleague actually in in like a
regenerating liver where you would put a
hepatoma or or a tumor in in in the in
the liver and then try to do a partial
hepattomy and see what would happen
because you know with with that original
paper I I wonder if you know if anybody
has repeated it. Uh uh this is kind of
like the the nuclear transfer
experiments which is like a foundational
piece of evidence that that I I feel
should be getting more attention.
>> Uh and you know those were like frog
cells in in a salamander. I don't know
how the immune system works there but
probably you know the immune system the
the innate immune system or the adaptive
immune system in the during the
regeneration which I I I I think it's
important through the macrofasages and
everything
>> might have you know maybe rejected those
cells or something like that.
>> Uh but I wonder if if this could be this
could be done in in mamleian systems
such such as the liver and if you have
been uh doing some of these experiments
too.
>> Yeah. Well a couple of things. first
first I I I think there are a couple of
other papers that were that like that
that were native um uh native salamander
that didn't have any foreign cells. So I
can I can try to send you what what I
have. Um this is also known in pleneria.
Same thing. So pleneria are very cancer
resistant but if you do manage to give
them a tumor then amputating and in fact
it's non-local. So you can amputate at
the other end of the animal and as they
regenerate they they clear up. So
there's there's data like this but but I
agree with you. So I think I think the
liver would be would be a fantastic test
of this and actually I've heard claims
and I I I don't have the clinical
knowledge to know if this is true but
I've heard claims that actually the
liver because of its constant
regenerative renewal actually normalizes
tumor fosi all the time that this is
basically that it's a rare case that one
actually continues and becomes a problem
but that that they come up from time to
time and um and that the regenerative
processes basically normalize them and
you know sort of I don't know if they
disappear or if they just become normal
cells and stay. I'm not sure. But yeah,
um liver liver also has some very
interesting bielectric properties, you
know. Um it's been it's known been known
for a long time that it's sort of uh it
hangs out in a weird uh sort of middle
position between the the strongly
polarized
most of the tissues of the of the body
are sort of postmotic and and quiescent
versus the really depolarized stem cells
and and cancer cells and so on. So the
liver is kind of in the middle. Uh so it
it retains some of that deolarized
character. So uh yeah, I think I mean
are you are you guys in a position to do
something like that? I think I think
it'd be a great experiment.
>> You know, we I was just thinking about
it. Uh technically yes, but of course we
would need funding for that, which is a
separate a separate question, but uh
yeah. Well, I I I think that's sort of
the the point of discussion is whether I
in your view uh
you know I I think when you talk about
the the breakdown of the communication
from the morphogenetic fields and the
the larger goals of of the tissue uh
that sort of sounds more even though
it's mediated mediated by secondary
messengers and something inside the cell
in in sort of the biometric perspective
that would be a sort of reprogramming I
think like if if a cell loses the
connection to the larger goals of of the
organism that is not per se a defect
inside the cell that is irreversible
that would be simply a disconnect. I
think in in our perspective uh at least
talking talking for myself speaking for
myself I I I think there's some sort of
when when you look at advanced tumors
perhaps like more malignant that are
selected for an an persistently
malignant uh tumor cells
every every even if you fix them uh
temporarily or your your inhibitor
proliferation there they tend to revert
back to to this uh proliferative
uh which we would think it's some
something happening inside the cell uh
that that cannot be recovered through
through signaling from the outside. uh I
don't know what what your thoughts would
be on that because like even the enco
genes kas you know uh make all these
things they they are happening inside
the cell from our perspective the
mitochondrial alterations would be also
mediated happening inside the cell and
they of course have connections to the
outside too and and they might be
mediating the the disconnect from you
know the reversion to the unicellular
behavior uh but but they they do happen
inside I think I think if you have a
single cell in a single well and you put
uh you know enco on top of it which we
would uh argue that they damage uh
oxidative uh and mitochondrial function
um you just have one cell and you can
make it a tumor cell without ever having
any connection to to the outside.
>> Yeah. I mean, I'm I'm not saying that
that after the disconnection has
happened that it doesn't accumulate
additional
defects that might really make it
difficult to work it back into the into
the collective. I mean, that's that's
that's possible. Although I I you know,
I I to me the jury is still out on how
much how much and at what point it
really becomes the hardware problem and
physically broken and irreversible. I'm
not I'm not sure about that. Um uh what
I will say is that I I think one of the
issues about uh so so so what we study
is the way that collectives versus
single cells navigate various problem
spaces. So anatomical space is one
transcriptional space is another. We've
shown that groups of embryos actually
have a quite different transcriptto than
single embryos. And one of the things
they do is they exchange information.
And you can see this we can see these
calcium waves passing between embryos
that allows them to resist various
terratogens much better. So large groups
resist better than small groups resist
better than singletons. So what we
haven't done but now you know listening
again to this I'm really motivated to to
start thinking about more about this is
to ask how larger collectives versus
smaller collectives navigate metabolic
space. So this is not this this this may
involve sort of physical defects, but it
may involve it may be a computational
problem as well as a physical problem
because the way that you uh proc the way
that you move in the space of of
metabolic possibilities, the way that
you process metabolic information, the
decisions you make about what you do
when certain things happen may be quite
different in a in a group versus versus
uh in a dis in disconnected cells. So, I
think it that that that's probably well
worth taking a look at, you know, as to
whether what we're looking at is is
really defects in the way they process
metabolic information and and move
through the space. So, so I, you know, I
I think we have to be careful like how
much of this is is a hardware defect and
how much of this is a is a software
bordering on cybernetic cognitive
defect. Yeah.
>> Well, I I think um when you mentioned
that that's what Peard was talking about
was the computational aspects of how
mitochondria control the morphagenetic
fields. It's a it's more of a
computational.
He's going into that depth of what
you've just described.
>> Um but it's pretty much cutting edge or
it's con a lot of it is conceptual right
now
>> um with with data that needs to be
further collected. So he was he was
speaking exactly about that this this
this computational and and when you
speak about the hardware and the
software it actually involves both um of
these aspects and trying to get a handle
on it uh right now has been by because
of exper the types of experimental
design that you would need to to uh to
do to try to to separate hardware from
software um requires requires a very
different perspective. effective because
now you're asking a different kind of a
question and when when you start
introducing new questions, you start
thinking about how you're going to
design experiments to answer that.
Before before you even could formulate a
question, you had a lot of stuff that
was just, you know,
just things that you saw that you
couldn't really put together. But but I
think now uh in light of of what we're
seeing u these kinds of things become
more relevant and and and a lot of a lot
more thinking needs to go into this.
>> Yeah. I mean we're set up for a lot of
that just not on the metabolic side. So
we track other things. We track
bilectric states. We track
transcriptional states. We track
morphagenesis in these exact kind of
experiments that that track the the
computational capacities of of smaller
groups and larger groups and so on. we
just haven't we haven't um pursued the
metabolic aspects but you know we
probably should
>> I I think that the bioenergetic question
might be very important for for your
work because when you when you talk
about all the you know sodium potassium
channels the chloride channels the
calcium channel all of these things
require energy and and our focus in in
the lab has been sort of interrogating
the the the bioenergetic states which we
feel is is more relevant for the therapy
because the idea of course is to alter
and and inhibit the the energy
production of of the tumor cells to on
the therapeutic side. Um I I don't know
with these uh electrosuticals or
electroicles that that you have been
testing. Uh did you see any any good
results with I I think you tested the
the the proton pump inhibitor uh and
some of these things
>> on TAP result. Yeah, we we tested it. It
worked really well and especially in
combination with other things
>> on on cells or also in in the mice to
inhibit tumor growth.
>> No, we only tested it in cells.
So, so actually can I ask about that the
the question of mice in general I mean
what what do you think of of mice as a
model system for this because what what
I hear and I'm not an expert what I hear
from from people is that well mouse
cancer has been solved a thousand times
the hard part is getting it into humans
but but everybody uses my mice as an
assay. What what what's your opinion on
that?
>> Well, I can speak to that. Um we've
never cured any mouse in our lab. The
mice that that we we work with are all
natural. Um, a lot of times you you have
uh these genetically engineered things
uh where you've made them uh and you've
you know programmed them in a certain
way. Um you know and you grow human
cells in a mouse like in xenographs the
mice has the mice have a compromised
immune system. You got 50 million years
of evolutionary difference between a
normal a human cell and a mouse cell and
you're putting them in these different
totally different environments and and
and the human cells never grow to the
aggression that you see them growing in
humans when you put them into the mice.
That's why we work with all cenic
orthotopic kinds of things
>> and and it's a trying to cure
those things. we we can't you know so
but people don't don't a lot of people
don't use that because they think
patient derived zenographs and all this
kind of stuff um they're not natural
this is these are artificial when you
work with artificial systems you get
artificial information um you got to
really work with as much natural uh in
the natural host the natural environment
from where the cells come and um a lot
of human cells don't metastasize and and
and when you say, you know, so look at
all the metastatic what what they're
doing is they're injecting um human
cells into the tail vein of a mouse. Uh
this is not metastasis. Yeah, they do
spread to different organs, but it's not
because they spread naturally. They were
forced to do that. So, you know, I've
broken down these models uh for so many
years knowing what's what's what's the
most informative model and then when you
talk to them the the field, they they
all seem to be locked into the models
that they've all developed to get their
answers and a lot of times you get a lot
of misinformation from that and
therefore just discount um the whole the
whole the whole system. I mean, dogs
have cancer. Um, you know, you can use
dog models. I mean, or humans, the best
the best model you got is the human. Um,
you know, if you if you this the reason
why we've had so much success in humans
is because we worked it out in natural
models in the mouse. Uh, so ultimately
the test is with human. Um, and if you
can if but you can ferret it out
mechanisms in vitro and in the natural.
See we again feriting out molecular
mechanisms we usually have to go to the
in vitro system but you don't want to go
try to figure out ferret it out a
molecular mechanism for a phenomenon
that doesn't exist. You you you want you
want to document the phenomenon and then
try to break it down in a in a in a in
another system. Um and then you put it
back and and and test it in in vivo and
ultimately you test it in the person
that that has the cancer. But uh our
invivo systems in the mouse are the most
natural. And the reason why we've made
the advances we have is because we use
only natural systems. And when we uh we
get Mike we get much much better outcome
in humans than in the mice. We developed
the system in the mice but then when we
test it in humans uh we get so much
better response because the difference
in basil metabolic rate this is so
important that people just completely
overlook the basil metabolic rate of the
mouse is seven times faster than that of
the the human. So a lot of the things
the humans the human body has a much
greater uh opportunity to work on things
where the mouse is like super
accelerated and uh you you really have
to be careful about about no knowing
that things can a mouse a mouse without
food lives about six six days if he's
lucky. I mean you humans depending how
much body fat you have they can live for
months. So you you have um a very
different metabolic uh environment in a
human than you do in a mouse. But if you
have natural systems in the mouse, you
can translate them into humans as long
as you understand differences in basil
metabolic rate which comes down to bio
bioenergetics and bioelectric uh
relationships to the energetics. So we
have to be aware of all those things as
well. [clears throat]
>> Gotcha.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I I I definitely agree that
uh not every mouse is created equal,
especially with like the different mouse
models people are using. But uh if I
could ask one question, Michael, uh I'm
very interested in the differences
between morphogenetic fields in culture
and you know different types of culture
for that matter and the mouse itself. It
seems clear that I I believe from your
work directly or at least work you've
cited that changing the morphagenetic
field is can be an initiating factor
that's necessary and sufficient to
induce proliferation. Uh do do you also
feel that it's that way in vivo like in
an in vivo mouse system as well in terms
of is it an initiate initiating factor
at times is it just uh sufficient but
not always necessary could you talk a
little bit about that
>> yeah I mean okay so so our work uh is
not so much in vivo in mice on this
although we've done human cells and like
um you know MSE's and things like that
and cell culture with David Kaplan and
so on uh as as far as I can see the the
evidence is that yeah it it plays that
role in vivo normally in and even in
mammals it's not the only thing of
course there are chemical factors that
and and biomechanical forces and things
like that too but yeah it plays it plays
that role part partly uh what it does is
coordinate um proliferation rates across
distance so try try to make you know the
kind of alometric scaling and things
like that try to make things scale so
yeah yeah I I think
Okay. So, um we should probably um if
you guys would like to consider more on
how we could work together, that would
be certainly an important thing,
>> right? Uh I think I think um you know
there are things that we could provide
uh for you and there's things that you
can provide for us uh to kind of move
the field in in a in a in this general
direction. Um because because a lot we
don't have answers to a lot of these
things. We don't understand a lot of
these things but I but I think the
energetics of how the mitochondria
control bioen uh bio uh energetics
um the electrical signaling the
signaling cascades that I am now
learning you know we've always been
nuclear centric in everything we've been
doing in in cancer and in biology in
general you know genomic sequencing and
just you know reductionism to the point
where where we've lost can lost sight of
what what what the bigger issues are and
and learning that that there's are there
there is an unusual there is an
interesting connection
between individual cells and the outside
world and the and the way this works and
and I don't I I and this is hard to
quantify when when you try to do a
genomic screen on things because you
have no clue whether whether the gene
expressions are associated with protein
production. it it's it's really hard to
to to link those gene expression
profiles to actual changes in in the mor
morphogenetic activities. So whereas the
mitochondria seem to be that kind of an
organel that offers the opportunity to
try to first time make these connections
um and the nucleus will just obey
whatever the mitochondria is doing. uh
it's a people talk about epigenetics
and and we've known that the
mitochondria control the epigenetic
signaling inside the nucleus. So you
know I always found it interesting that
the mitochondria has relinquished most
of their genes to the nucleus um but
they've kept 13 of them uh that they
never relinquished and those 13 control
the destiny of the cell. Um so
[clears throat] uh and they have a
circular genome and they have several
different there's multiple circular
genomes. So it's really it's really a
fascinating organel uh in that regard.
Um and you know interestingly enough
that bits and pieces of mitochondrial
genome have become in integrated into
the nuclear genome as pseudo genes.
They're really not expressed but they
integrate into the into the nuclear
genome in in in many different ways. So
um you know how why those 13 genes have
never been allowed to be part of the
nuclear genome. Uh even though the the
nucleus controls some parts of the
proteins of the electron transport. Uh
the key ones the key ones that determine
the destiny of the cell are retained in
that mitochondrial genome. So it seems
to me that it's like anything. If you
can have some someone do the job for
you, why should you waste the time doing
it? and and that organel uh knowing that
you have a big ass nucleus with a lot of
DNA and a lot of chromosomes and if that
can follow the directions of the or of
the mitochondria that saves this organel
why should I have to replicate
everything this other organel is replic
is doing and and and therefore it would
give it a much greater controlling it's
a controlling organel it really controls
the destiny of the the whole physiology
the other thing about aging is uh we we
die from um the second law of thermody
than entropy. Uh all of humans and mice
and different organisms have a they have
a a defined life limit on the planet. Um
you know some of them can the the the
way you live longer is you keep your
mitochondria healthy. uh that that will
just all it is is delaying entropy, the
second law of thermodynamics. Because
eventually people die and they die from
disorder and and and and it's
interesting when people die of old age
often times they're pretty pretty alert
up until like a two or three days before
they die. It's almost like the entire
mitochondrial energy system just turns
off. Um and and it's you die. [snorts]
Um, but as long as you can keep the
system healthy, you can live longer and
avoid and prevent a lot of different
diseases that you are confronted with
because each one of these chronic
diseases in one way or another increases
entropy in a particular organ or in the
system itself and you live you don't
live as long. So, so clearly
understanding aging is understanding
mitochondrial energetics because uh it's
hard to get cancer if your mitochondria
healthy. It's hard to get type two
diabetes if your mitochondria are
healthy. You exercise, your mitochondria
stay healthy. Ketone bodies, as as we've
written, are a super fuel. They reduce
when you burn ketones, you reduce re
reactive oxygen species. You get more
energy per breath of air when you're
burning a ketone than when you're
burning uh a p when you break down
pyuvate or even fatty acids which are
uncoupled uncouple the mitochondria
create more ROS. So all of these things
are are interesting points to consider
when we when we study biological systems
and and I think the reason why we
haven't spend as much time on the
mitochondria they're hard to see. Uh
when you look under electron a light
microscopy you see a big ass nucleus. I
mean that's so you're focusing on that.
Um, the mitochondria is a morphic
organel that's kind of diffused through
the cytoplasm and you didn't start to
really see it until you developed
electron microscopy. Warberg did all his
work based on on chemical measurements.
He was never he never looked at a
mitochondria. He didn't have the the
tools to do that. He didn't have the
micro microscopy in those days. He did
it based everything on on on the
readouts of the fermentation. But then
when you start looking at it in a more
dynamic way with the microscopy and
different things, now we're starting to
take a deeper look at mitochondria. So,
so um I I think you're going to find
them to be controlling elements uh of
biology uh systems function biology.
It's going to be related to the
efficiency of energy and the integ the
interaction of different organ systems.
And I think we're just beginning now to
turn our attention uh in this direction
uh especially because it's it's f it's
related to chronic diseases uh which are
crippling uh our our country and the
world actually. So um this is now
becoming a major problem and a lot of it
has to do with mitochondrial dysfunction
in different ways because we always
wondering like in brain you know you
have Parkinson's disease uh this is a
mitochondrial reactive oxygen process
and and sub and the cells of the
substantia the these cells up and die
they they don't become cancer we we've
always wondered why cardio cardiac
myioytes and neurons of the brain rarely
if ever become tumorogenic they they
can't they can't um switch to a
fermentation metabolism. Their their
energetic requirements require oxidative
phosphorilation and when that goes down
they die. They don't they don't become
cancer cells. So we're starting to see
why some cells are more prone to become
neoplastic and other cells not
neoplastic and how all this works
together. So so um and and we're
starting to see a lot of these
connections for the first time. So, I
I'm looking forward to a a dynamic
future, but we we have to start by by
addressing certain questions that we do
not have answers to at this